R Basics for Lecture 1
================

## Econ B2000, Statistics and Introduction to Econometrics

## Kevin R Foster, Colin Powell School, the City College of New York, CUNY

For this class we’ll be using the statistical analysis program, R. The
computer labs here on campus have the necessary software. If you have
your own computer, download and install the program from [R
Project](http://www.r-project.org/) along with
[R-Studio](http://www.rstudio.com/). Depending on your particular device
these details will be different so take it patiently and figure it out -
there are sufficient online sources for help, to address any problem
that arises.

The best way to learn it is to just do it. How many times have you got a
new game, skipped reading the instructions, and learned by crashing it a
few times? This isn’t quite so simple but the basic gist remains - try
it. Below I give you some pointers about how to just do it, but they’re
meant to be read then immediately done in real life, I’ll give you some
commands to just copy-and-paste into the program.

The program, R, is the machine underneath that does the work, while
R-Studio is a skin on top that makes it easier to use. Install both then
run R-Studio, and you’ll get something that looks like this: ![image of
R Studio](screenshot_RStudio1.png)

The screen has 4 parts: the Console at lower left (where I drew the
green arrow) is most important since that’s where you type in the
commands to R.

You can start by just copying and pasting commands from this document
into the “Console” and seeing the output from the program.

The guide, *An Introduction to R*, suggests these commands to give a
basic flavor of what’s done and hint at the power. Don’t worry too much
about each step for now, this is just a glimpse to show that with a few
commands you can do some relatively sophisticated estimation – i.e. for
a small cost you can get a large benefit. Copy them and paste into the
“Console”.

``` r
x <- 1:50
w <- 1 + sqrt(x)/2
example1 <- data.frame(x=x, y= x + rnorm(x)*w)
attach(example1)
```

This creates x and y variables (where the rnorm command creates random
numbers from a normal distribution), puts them into a data frame, then
attaches that data frame so that R can use it in later calculations.
(What’s a data frame? A way to collect together related data items.)
Next some stats - create a linear model (that’s the “lm”) then a
“lowess” nonparametric local regression, and plot the two estimations to
compare. (Just copy and paste these, don’t worry about understanding
them for now!)

``` r
fm <- lm(y ~ x)
summary(fm)
```

    ## 
    ## Call:
    ## lm(formula = y ~ x)
    ## 
    ## Residuals:
    ##     Min      1Q  Median      3Q     Max 
    ## -8.5372 -1.5831  0.2436  1.4965  7.8226 
    ## 
    ## Coefficients:
    ##             Estimate Std. Error t value Pr(>|t|)    
    ## (Intercept) -0.45583    0.90898  -0.501    0.618    
    ## x            0.99171    0.03102  31.967   <2e-16 ***
    ## ---
    ## Signif. codes:  0 '***' 0.001 '**' 0.01 '*' 0.05 '.' 0.1 ' ' 1
    ## 
    ## Residual standard error: 3.166 on 48 degrees of freedom
    ## Multiple R-squared:  0.9551, Adjusted R-squared:  0.9542 
    ## F-statistic:  1022 on 1 and 48 DF,  p-value: < 2.2e-16

``` r
lrf <- lowess(x, y)
plot(x, y)
lines(x, lrf$y)
abline(0, 1, lty=3)
abline(coef(fm))
```

![](R_lecture1_householdpulse_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-2-1.png)<!-- -->

``` r
detach()
```

Your own graph should look similar although with the random numbers, not
exactly.

The final “detach” command just cleans up, it is the opposite of
“attach”.

Later you will find that while it is possible to go back and fix up code
that you previously ran in R (the up arrow brings most recent commands),
it is a bit of a pain. It is easier to write out the code in the
upper-left panel, then R-Studio can obediently run all or part of it in
R for you (as you hit Ctrl-Enter, it runs each line). Then if you make a
mistake or just want to do it again, it’s a bit easier. You can save
your code for next time, as well.

One big thing to learn is that while pushing buttons is easier at first,
eventually you want to be able to write code. I won’t insist that you do
that from day 1, but keep it in mind as a goal to work towards. In R,
you can usually see the code generated by the button-pushes so you can
learn.

For all of these commands, you can use the help box on R Studio. But as
I said, don’t worry much about those commands for now, I’m not expecting
you to become an R-ninja overnight.

# With Some Data

We will go through some basic stats with R using the Census Bureau’s
Household Pulse Data, a survey about how people were doing during and
after Covid times. I will help you get some quick wins before circling
back to get into more detail.

You have to learn a bit about your computer’s filing system. When you
download stuff it probably goes into a Download folder. When you
installed R and R-Studio, those went into their own folders (probably
within some Application folder) and then the program might have created
a R folder for your work.

It’s now time to be intentional and organized. Create a folder for your
R work. Within that folder, create a separate folder for each project
that you work on – so for this project, create a folder called
“ecob2000_lecture1”.

Go and download the Household Pulse data from the [class
page](http://kfoster.ccny.cuny.edu/classes/fall2024/), which will likely
put that file into your Downloads folder. Find that file,
Household_Pulse_data_ph4c2.RData, probably in downloads - move that into
your new folder, ecob2000_lecture1.

R will look for files in a particular directory or folder (same concept
just different words). Type the command, “getwd()” to see where it’s
currently looking. Then use the command, “setwd,” to tell it where it
ought to be looking (the R/ecob2000_lecture1 folder that you created
just now, or wherever you put that data file). Alt you can click
“Session” then “Set Working Directory” then “Choose Directory” and click
the folder, and that will insert the “setwd” command onto the Console
line. Tell R to look for the data in the folder where you put the data.
Even better is to use R Studio’s Project function [here’s more
detail](https://www.r-bloggers.com/rstudio-projects-and-working-directories-a-beginners-guide/).

Then run these commands (output from those commands is below),

``` r
load("Household_Pulse_data_ph4c2.RData")
#glimpse(acs2017_ny) try this later
Household_Pulse_data[1:10,1:6]
```

    ##    TBIRTH_YEAR    RHISPANIC RRACE     EEDUC        MS EGENID_BIRTH
    ## 1         1976 Not Hispanic Black  bach deg separated       female
    ## 2         1961 Not Hispanic White assoc deg  divorced       female
    ## 3         1988 Not Hispanic White   adv deg   married       female
    ## 4         1956 Not Hispanic White assoc deg   married         male
    ## 5         1970 Not Hispanic White  bach deg   married         male
    ## 6         1984 Not Hispanic White   adv deg   married       female
    ## 7         1968     Hispanic White some coll  divorced         male
    ## 8         1967 Not Hispanic White   adv deg   married         male
    ## 9         1972 Not Hispanic White some coll   married       female
    ## 10        1956 Not Hispanic White  bach deg   married         male

``` r
attach(Household_Pulse_data)
```

The data is structured that each row is a person, so the first person is
somebody who was born in 1976, is Not Hispanic, is Black, has a
bachelors degree, has marital status of ‘separated’, was born as female
and then there is a lot more data in the other variables. Next row, row
two, born in 1961, Not Hispanic, White, with as associates degree,
divorced, born female; third row born in 1988, etc, etc. ; then on for
many more rows.

You can also use the command, summary, to find out about data.

``` r
summary(Household_Pulse_data)
```

    ##   TBIRTH_YEAR          RHISPANIC       RRACE                EEDUC      
    ##  Min.   :1936   Not Hispanic:64658   White:57562   less than hs:  585  
    ##  1st Qu.:1957   Hispanic    : 6494   Black: 6345   some hs     : 1282  
    ##  Median :1969                        Asian: 3379   HS diploma  :10094  
    ##  Mean   :1970                        Other: 3866   some coll   :15415  
    ##  3rd Qu.:1983                                      assoc deg   : 7614  
    ##  Max.   :2006                                      bach deg    :19137  
    ##                                                    adv deg     :17025  
    ##          MS        EGENID_BIRTH       GENID_DESCRIBE       SEXUAL_ORIENTATION
    ##  NA       :  477   male  :31510   NA         :36702   NA            :  969   
    ##  married  :39339   female:39642   male       :15089   gay or lesbian: 2386   
    ##  widowed  : 4551                  female     :18830   straight      :62989   
    ##  divorced :11585                  transgender:  147   bisexual      : 2756   
    ##  separated: 1300                  other      :  384   something else: 1177   
    ##  never    :13900                                      dont know     :  875   
    ##                                                                              
    ##                       KIDS_LT5Y                         KIDS_5_11Y   
    ##  NA                        :63953   NA                       :60784  
    ##  Yes children under 5 in HH: 7199   Yes children 5 - 11 in HH:10368  
    ##                                                                      
    ##                                                                      
    ##                                                                      
    ##                                                                      
    ##                                                                      
    ##                      KIDS_12_17Y                                 ENROLLNONE   
    ##  NA                        :60641   NA                                :66789  
    ##  Yes children 12 - 17 in HH:10511   children not in any type of school: 4363  
    ##                                                                               
    ##                                                                               
    ##                                                                               
    ##                                                                               
    ##                                                                               
    ##                   WRKLOSSRV                              ANYWORK     
    ##  NA                    : 1558   NA                           : 1819  
    ##  yes recent HH job loss: 6685   yes employment in last 7 days:41672  
    ##  no recent HH job loss :62909   no employment in last 7 days :27661  
    ##                                                                      
    ##                                                                      
    ##                                                                      
    ##                                                                      
    ##                 KINDWORK    
    ##  NA                 :30263  
    ##  work for govt      : 6654  
    ##  work for private co:23400  
    ##  work for nonprofit : 5025  
    ##  self employed      : 5011  
    ##  work in family biz :  799  
    ##                             
    ##                                           RSNNOWRKRV   
    ##  NA                                            :44596  
    ##  concerned about spreading                     :16005  
    ##  caring for elderly                            : 3830  
    ##  employer closed because covid                 : 2835  
    ##  sick or disabled                              : 1022  
    ##  am/was sick w covid or caring for sick w covid: 1021  
    ##  (Other)                                       : 1843  
    ##                                 TWDAYS     
    ##  NA                                : 2550  
    ##  had 1-2 telework days in past week: 6797  
    ##  had 3-4 telework days in past week: 4617  
    ##  had 5+ telework days in past week :11121  
    ##  had no telework days in past week :46067  
    ##                                            
    ##                                            
    ##                                             ANXIOUS     
    ##  NA                                             : 5480  
    ##  no anxiety over past 2 wks                     :37174  
    ##  several days anxiety over past 2 wks           :19618  
    ##  more than half the days anxiety over past 2 wks: 4329  
    ##  nearly every day anxiety                       : 4551  
    ##                                                         
    ##                                                         
    ##                                              WORRY      
    ##  NA                                             : 5580  
    ##  no worry over past 2 wks                       :43087  
    ##  several days worried over past 2 wks           :15509  
    ##  more than half the days worried over past 2 wks: 3386  
    ##  nearly every day worry                         : 3590  
    ##                                                         
    ##                                                         
    ##                                                  INTEREST    
    ##  NA                                                  : 5566  
    ##  no days in past 2 wks with little interest in things:45234  
    ##  several days over past 2 wks                        :14309  
    ##  more than half the days over past 2 wks             : 3240  
    ##  nearly every day                                    : 2803  
    ##                                                              
    ##                                                              
    ##                                       DOWN      
    ##  NA                                     : 5600  
    ##  no days in past 2 wks feeling depressed:44300  
    ##  several days over past 2 wks           :15438  
    ##  more than half the days over past 2 wks: 2965  
    ##  nearly every day                       : 2849  
    ##                                                 
    ##                                                 
    ##                                      MHLTH_NEED   
    ##  NA                                       :51723  
    ##  all children need mental health treatment: 1324  
    ##  some but not all children                : 2266  
    ##  no, none of the children                 :15839  
    ##                                                   
    ##                                                   
    ##                                                   
    ##                                                   MHLTH_GET    
    ##  NA                                                    :67609  
    ##  all children get the mental health treatment they need: 2743  
    ##  some but not all children                             :  347  
    ##  no, none of the children                              :  453  
    ##                                                                
    ##                                                                
    ##                                                                
    ##                                                  MHLTH_SATISFD  
    ##  NA                                                     :68076  
    ##  satisfied with all the mental health treatment they get: 2061  
    ##  some but not all                                       :  816  
    ##  no, none                                               :  199  
    ##                                                                 
    ##                                                                 
    ##                                                                 
    ##                                            MHLTH_DIFFCLT  
    ##  NA                                               :67608  
    ##  not difficult to get kids mental health treatment: 1244  
    ##  somewhat difficult                               : 1332  
    ##  very difficult                                   :  719  
    ##  unable to get treatment due to difficulty        :  186  
    ##  did not try to get                               :   63  
    ##                                                           
    ##                                 SOCIAL1               SOCIAL2     
    ##  NA                                 : 6563   NA           : 6518  
    ##  always get social emotional support:19032   always lonely: 2381  
    ##  usually                            :23055   usually      : 4847  
    ##  sometimes                          :12604   sometimes    :17999  
    ##  rarely                             : 5844   rarely       :23362  
    ##  never                              : 4054   never        :16045  
    ##                                                                   
    ##                                                          SUPPORT1    
    ##  NA                                                          : 6579  
    ##  talk on phone w family friends neighbors less than once week:11831  
    ##  1 or 2 per week                                             :18093  
    ##  3 or 4 per week                                             :14001  
    ##  5 + per week                                                :20648  
    ##                                                                      
    ##                                                                      
    ##                                                  SUPPORT2    
    ##  NA                                                  : 6638  
    ##  get together w friends or family less than once week:25546  
    ##  1 or 2 per week                                     :25665  
    ##  3 or 4 per week                                     : 8552  
    ##  5 + per week                                        : 4751  
    ##                                                              
    ##                                                              
    ##                                                               SUPPORT3    
    ##  NA                                                               : 6703  
    ##  attend church or religious ceremony never or less than 1 per year:35992  
    ##  1 to 3 per year                                                  : 8433  
    ##  4 to 11 per year                                                 : 3948  
    ##  12+ times per year                                               :16076  
    ##                                                                           
    ##                                                                           
    ##                                      SUPPORT4    
    ##  NA                                      : 7353  
    ##  attend clubs or orgs less than once week:50214  
    ##  1 or 2 per week                         :10676  
    ##  3 or 4 per week                         : 2909  
    ##                                                  
    ##                                                  
    ##                                                  
    ##                                                              SUPPORT1EXP   
    ##  NA                                                                :11402  
    ##  text on phone w friends or family or neighbors less than once week: 7990  
    ##  1 or 2 per week                                                   :10780  
    ##  3 or 4 per week                                                   :40980  
    ##  5 + per week                                                      :    0  
    ##                                                                            
    ##                                                                            
    ##                           CURFOODSUF   
    ##  NA                            : 8111  
    ##  had enough food               :42018  
    ##  had enough but not what wanted:16391  
    ##  sometimes not enough food     : 3442  
    ##  often not enough food         : 1190  
    ##                                        
    ##                                        
    ##                                                CHILDFOOD    
    ##  NA                                                 :63887  
    ##  often kids not eating enough because couldnt afford:  370  
    ##  sometimes kids not eating enough                   : 1425  
    ##  kids got enough food                               : 5470  
    ##                                                             
    ##                                                             
    ##                                                             
    ##                             PRICESTRESS   
    ##  NA                               :21815  
    ##  very stressed about price changes:18189  
    ##  Moderate stress price changes    :13888  
    ##  a little stress price changes    :13278  
    ##  no stress                        : 3982  
    ##                                           
    ##                                           
    ##                            TENURE     
    ##  NA                           : 9149  
    ##  housing owned free and clear :15998  
    ##  housing owned with mortgage  :29700  
    ##  housing rented               :15439  
    ##  housing occupied without rent:  866  
    ##                                       
    ##                                       
    ##                                 LIVQTRRV                RENTCUR     
    ##  live in detached 1 family          :41925   NA             :55782  
    ##  NA                                 : 9749   current on rent:13906  
    ##  live in bldg w 5+ apts             : 8145   behind on rent : 1464  
    ##  live in 1 family attached to others: 4758                          
    ##  live in mobile home                : 2637                          
    ##  live in building with 3-4 apts     : 2115                          
    ##  (Other)                            : 1823                          
    ##                 MORTCUR                                             EVICT      
    ##  NA                 :41545   NA                                        :69734  
    ##  current on mortgage:28370   very likely evicted in next 2 months      :  190  
    ##  behind on mortgage : 1237   somewhat likely evicted in next 2 months  :  354  
    ##                              not very likely evicted in next 2 months  :  394  
    ##                              not at all likely evicted in next 2 months:  480  
    ##                                                                                
    ##                                                                                
    ##                                        FORCLOSE                   RECVDVACC    
    ##  NA                                        :69931   NA                 :10284  
    ##  very likely forclosed in next 2 months    :   52   yes got vaxx       :52519  
    ##  somewhat likely forclosed in next 2 months:  182   no did not get vaxx: 8349  
    ##  not very likely forclosed in next 2 months:  452                              
    ##  not at all forclosed in next 2 months     :  535                              
    ##                                                                                
    ##                                                                                
    ##                               HADCOVIDRV   
    ##  NA                                :10717  
    ##  yes tested + or doc told had Covid:36478  
    ##  no                                :23957  
    ##                                            
    ##                                            
    ##                                            
    ##                                            
    ##                                LONGCOVID    
    ##  NA                                 :36298  
    ##  had symptoms 3mo or more Long Covid: 9685  
    ##  no                                 :25169  
    ##                                             
    ##                                             
    ##                                             
    ##                                             
    ##                                     SYMPTOMS    
    ##  NA                                     :34850  
    ##  had no covid symptoms although tested +: 1350  
    ##  had mild Covid symptoms                :13155  
    ##  had moderate Covid symptoms            :16783  
    ##  had severe Covid symptoms              : 5014  
    ##                                                 
    ##                                                 
    ##                       INCOME             EST_ST     
    ##  NA                      :12256   California: 5215  
    ##  HH income $100k - 149   :10444   Texas     : 3456  
    ##  HH income $50k - 74.9   : 9461   Washington: 2892  
    ##  HH income $75 - 99.9    : 7844   Florida   : 2613  
    ##  HH income $200k +       : 7480   Michigan  : 2033  
    ##  HH income less than $25k: 6782   Arizona   : 2018  
    ##  (Other)                 :16885   (Other)   :52925  
    ##                    PRIVHLTH                      PUBHLTH            REGION     
    ##  has private health ins:45139   has public health ins:24916   Northeast:10731  
    ##  no private health ins :12251   no public health ins :30126   South    :23680  
    ##  NA                    :13762   NA                   :16110   Midwest  :15071  
    ##                                                               West     :21670  
    ##                                                                                
    ##                                                                                
    ##                                                                                
    ##  Num_kids_Pub_School Num_kids_Priv_School Num_kids_homeschool
    ##  Min.   :0.0         Min.   :0.00         Min.   :0.00       
    ##  1st Qu.:1.0         1st Qu.:1.00         1st Qu.:1.00       
    ##  Median :2.0         Median :1.00         Median :1.00       
    ##  Mean   :1.7         Mean   :1.26         Mean   :1.22       
    ##  3rd Qu.:2.0         3rd Qu.:2.00         3rd Qu.:2.00       
    ##  Max.   :4.0         Max.   :2.00         Max.   :2.00       
    ##  NA's   :58066       NA's   :69107        NA's   :70079

So this shows that there are 71,152 people in this dataset.

### Simple Stats

We compare the average birth year of the men and the women in the data,

``` r
summary(TBIRTH_YEAR[GENID_DESCRIBE == "female"])
```

    ##    Min. 1st Qu.  Median    Mean 3rd Qu.    Max. 
    ##    1936    1957    1970    1970    1983    2006

``` r
summary(TBIRTH_YEAR[GENID_DESCRIBE == "male"])
```

    ##    Min. 1st Qu.  Median    Mean 3rd Qu.    Max. 
    ##    1936    1956    1969    1970    1983    2006

``` r
summary(TBIRTH_YEAR[GENID_DESCRIBE == "transgender"])
```

    ##    Min. 1st Qu.  Median    Mean 3rd Qu.    Max. 
    ##    1936    1983    1992    1988    1998    2006

``` r
summary(TBIRTH_YEAR[GENID_DESCRIBE == "other"])
```

    ##    Min. 1st Qu.  Median    Mean 3rd Qu.    Max. 
    ##    1936    1962    1978    1976    1990    2006

``` r
summary(TBIRTH_YEAR[GENID_DESCRIBE == "NA"])
```

    ##    Min. 1st Qu.  Median    Mean 3rd Qu.    Max. 
    ##    1936    1956    1969    1970    1983    2006

This uses the factor variable, GENID_DESCRIBE, which asks people about
their current gender identity.

Males in this dataset are, on average, a bit older, with an average age
of 54.3 compared with 53.7 for females. You might wonder (if you were to
begin to think like a statistician) whether that is a big difference -
hold onto that thought!

Alternately you can use the commands to calculate the average, mean(),
and the standard deviation, sd(), to get those statistics:

``` r
# here i want to find average ages of men and women
mean(TBIRTH_YEAR[GENID_DESCRIBE == "female"])
```

    ## [1] 1970.346

``` r
sd(TBIRTH_YEAR[GENID_DESCRIBE == "female"])
```

    ## [1] 15.56546

``` r
mean(TBIRTH_YEAR[GENID_DESCRIBE == "male"])
```

    ## [1] 1969.691

``` r
sd(TBIRTH_YEAR[GENID_DESCRIBE == "male"])
```

    ## [1] 16.09923

Here’s some stats questions: will the average age be the same as 2024
minus the average birth year? will the standard deviation of birth year
be different from standard deviation of age? Convince yourself.

Later you might encounter cases where you want more complicated dummy
variables and want to use logical relations “and” “or” “not” (the
symbols “&”, “\|”, “!”) or the “\>=” or multiplication or division.

As you’re going along, if you’re copying-and-pasting then you might not
have had trouble, but if you’re typing then you’ve probably realized
that R is persnickety - the variable TBIRTH_YEAR is not equivalent to
tbirth_year nor TBirthYear nor tBirTH_YeaR… You might be wondering if
there’s an easier way than copy-paste; *there is*. If you highlight text
in the Source pane and then hit CTRL-Enter, that will run the block of
code. Alt if you click the “Knit HTML” button from the Rmd file then
that will recreate the webpage as well as run all of the commands.

### More Details

At the beginning you’ll be just copying commands that I give you but as
you start making changes, you have to understand what’s going on.

For better or worse there is rarely just a single way of doing things,
when people talk about the R language it does indeed have many features
of a language. Just like a spoken language has many ways of saying “hi”
so too there are lots of different ways to ask R to produce means of
different groups. I am showing you a few particular ways but if you look
around online you’ll find others.

Remember to save your work. The computers in the lab wipe the memory
clean when you log off so back up your files. GitHub is the best way to
do that – especially since you’ll be collaborating on work.

But be careful - you have the option of saving your code and/or your
workspace; it is always better to save just the code. For example, your
code might load some data (at this stage, usually data that I’ve
provided). If you make changes to this data during your session, you do
not want to restart with those changes. If you just save your code and
re-run the program, you will start fresh. If instead you save the
workspace, then you end up saving all of your scraps and changes - which
eventually start to build up. So only save your workspace if you’ve run
a large chunk of code that you don’t want to have to later re-run. (This
is even more true if you “attach” data frames without later “detach”-ing
them!)

This is a whole different approach to workflow and project management.
The old bad way is to have something like an Excel sheet, where a human
goes through and makes a few changes to the original data – and these
changes might well be smart and good! But they don’t replicate and
they’re even tough to remember after some time. And it’s tough to track
back and find errors, whether they are typos or were in the original
data.

We will be using 2 main file types: R script (lines of instructions to R
on how to calculate some statistics) and R Markdown (which combines the
instructions to R along with text around it, which is how I created this
file). There are more types of course but those are the ones for now.

There is a bigger philosophy behind this: the idea of “reproducible
research,” that if you share your .Rmd file then anybody else can run
the exact same program and get the exact same results. It’s a way of
convincing an audience that there was no skulduggery in how the data
relates to the conclusion. It’s useful in class since it’s an easy way
to submit homework or share work with your study group.

Sharing is caring. You’ve got to get in the habit of knowing that your
code is not some personal scratch file that only has to work for you.
Most workplaces are in teams so the code has to be understandable more
broadly. And if you recall from Behavioral Economics, there are times
where it’s useful to think of your future self as a different person. (I
do that! I load old code that I wrote and sometimes yell, “I hate the
frickin a-hole who wrote this code!”) So set good habits right from the
beginning. If you have your own desk in your own office then maybe it’s
a mess, that’s your choice. But if you share a space then you know you
have to be neater and not be that slob that everybody else hates. Your
coding too. You will share code with your study group.

You will put your code on GitHub – that’s how you will work with your
study group and how you’ll submit homework. If you decide to work in the
field, you will want to share examples of your code and GitHub is the
standard.

Create an account on GitHub – first [here’s Jenny Bryan with a great
explanation of the
why](https://dx.doi.org/10.7287%2Fpeerj.preprints.3159v2), then [she
gives complete instructions here](https://happygitwithr.com/index.html).
Go read the first about why, then read her parts 4 and 5 and create your
account. You’ll eventually read the whole thing carefully.

Each set of coding should be a Project – in RStudio, that’s a particular
thing. In File menu, find “New Project”. Each project has its own folder
along with subfolders within for data and output. Above I asked you to
create a R folder with subfolders within for each project including
ecob2000_lecture1 for this one.

In your code, use the comments generously. I sometimes first use the
comments to write what I’m trying to do as a way to set down my goals
for each segment. Then can implement them with the following code.
Again, be mindful that other people (and your future self) will be
trying to follow along with your code to understand what’s going on.

In the next part (Lecture 1 A) I’ll go a bit deeper into the coding,
talk about packages in R, and get into some details about the data.
